<!-- What is multiple dispatch ? -->
<!-- Programming -->
<!-- Dispatch -->
<!-- Post discusses an example scenario that explains the working of dispatch and eventually the concept of multiple dispatch. -->
<!-- 02-11-2021 -->

I found it extremely tricky to understand the importance that a feature like 
multiple dispatch might offer, but as it usually is the devil is in the details.
Someone with no idea about dispatch, let alone multiple dispatch 
, you might find this an interesting read. People with familiarity in the subject might point out the 
incompleteness of this explanation, but thats okay.
With that out of the way, lets start with an example that I think encapsualtes the essence and 
greater meaning multiple dispatch provides while being extremely obvious all along.

#### Imagine a situation where you are asked to design a game in Java with the following specification

  1. A room that accomodates various types people _(Husband, Wife, Maid, etc...)_.
  2. The room can contain objects with which the people can interact with.
  

> The husband is a pianist and plays the **piano**, the maid's job is to keep the piano clean and wife 
> just regrets marrying a musician every time she sees the piano.
> Similarly, when the husband comes across the **fridge** he pours himself a drink, the maid restocks the 
> fridge and the wife checks the fride and updates her grocery list.
> The husband ignores __any other object__, wife draws its sketch, maid looks in awe.

__Problem Statement__ : Imagine this is a game you are developing, the user might be any of the following 
type of person and might interact with any kind of an object. You do not know what kind of person the user has actually picked, write code to ensure that the right action gets executed. 


__A base class of person__

```java
interface Person {
  // Some common properties like name, etc.
}

// For sake of simplicity let us first consider the husband only
class Husband implements Person {
  public void interact(EnvObj a) { 
    System.out.println("ignore");
  }
  public void interact(Piano a) {
    System.out.println("Play"); 
  }
  public void interact(Fridge a) {
    System.out.println("ignore"); 
  }
  // ...
}
// ... similarly for other characters
```
__Defining the environment objects__

```java
// Objects On Scene
class EnvObject {
  // Some common properties like mass, acceleration, etc.
}
class Piano extends EnvObject {
}
class Fridge extends EnvObject {
}
// ... similarly for other objects
```

__The interaction method when a person encounters an environment object__

1. __This is wrong because of multiple dispatch__ 
``` java
  public void encounters(Person p, EnvObject o) {
    p.interact(o); // always prints ignore ?? why ??
  }
```
The code always prints __ignore__

The environment objects runtime type can be anything _(Fridge, Piano, etc...)_, but when calling the interact method we only 
look at the runtime type of Person _(which can be __Husband,Wife,etc...__)_ but the runtime type of the __EnvObject__ is not decoded.

__This is because of single dispatch that Java supports.__

2. __An alternative approach (using instance of)__ 
``` java
  public void encounters(Person p, EnvObject o) {
    if (o instance of Piano) {
      Piano obj = (Piano) o;
      p.interact(obj);
    } else {
      p.interact(o);
    }
  }
```

In this approach we explicitly do typecasting which is a very inefficient way to solve this problem.

Another major drawback of this approach is the amount of code we might need to add if say we added,
a new object into this world called **burger**.
What do you do when you see a burger, you eat it.
But in our code, we have to individually define the action of eating a burger in each and every one of 
the class. ughh... what a drag.

What if we could define something that says,

```
(Person, Burger) - interact -> "just eat it."
```
In doing so we come across a scenario of unquestionable uncertainity,
```
(Husband, EnvObject) -> "ignore"

(Person, Burger) -> "Eat it"
```
Both of there definitions are correct in their own regard, but which is __more correct__ is obvious.

To understand it in simple terms, it is like asking a man with his eyes closed to tell color of the 
crayons in his hand. There may exist many solutions to this problem, but the simplest is to open his eyes.

One interesting solution that I must follow this post with is the visitor pattern, 
Given two generic object types, we ensure that relevant method of theiry interaction is called without explicitly defining so.

### SOURCES

__source 1__: [wiki.c2 article on Multiple Dispatch](https://wiki.c2.com/?MultipleDispatch)

__source 2__: [Prototypes with Multiple Dispatch: An Expressive and Dynamic Object Model](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~aldrich/papers/ecoop05pmd.pdf)
